HOW I EXPLAINED MACHINE LEARNING TO MY GRANDMOM?
Vritika Naik
Not all grandparents are prone to technology. Those who are, tend to know a lot more than others and it is easier to explain tough concepts to them. However, for a grandmom who restrains from using technology due to the negative effects, it’s one of the hardest things. 
During the lockdown, seeing the various apps and softwares mom uses to get daily updates of Covid-19 patients, my grandmom stumbled upon a question – “How do they get all this data and how is it updated? How do people manage so much of data and map it so accurately and timely?”
I was really excited to tell her about the concepts of Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Deep learning but had to make sure she understood what I was saying. These terms would seem alien to her. So, I thought of relating it to something she would easily understand.
“Granny, you know all what you ask about it done by a computer. That one small resource has a powerful brain to find all of this. Even my laptop and your mobile have a brain of the same kind. And people do the work of teaching these devices by making software and feeding them data examples. The brain does the work of learning. More examples it is given, the better it learns. It’s just like our dog, Lucky but with a better brain and better understanding. Show Lucky, a ball 5 times while calling it a ball, it will know the 6th time where the ball is. Same goes to a computer. 
You know the filters you love to use on snapchat, how they recognize where your face is and fit so properly? It uses the same learning mechanism. This is machine learning because here a machine learns from existing examples.”
Granny was excited. She suddenly felt overwhelmed with the knowledge she had gained. She went forward and even asked me about how these machines differentiate between fake Covid-19 news and real ones.  I smiled. She was getting the hang of it.
“You were 18 when you first started cooking. You used to tell me how you would fail and slowly understood how much of each ingredient is required for how much food. It is similar here. The machine learns over time by learning how to differentiate between fake and real. We, human teach it. Giving this knowledge to machines is called artificial intelligence. Machine learning is a part of it.”
“So, when I watch serials on my phone, the recommendations on the side are machine learning too?”
“Yes, Yes. That’s like my good smart granny. But, there are both good and bad sides to it. The pros outweigh the cons. Some people think that one day robots with the artificial intelligence will come kill all of humanity. But machine is what we make out of it. So, we need to instill good values to it, just like you did into us and AI will do wonders.”
Granny was happy and decided to find some more examples of machine learning. It’s good to see your grandparents learn and grow at this age too. Being able to help them learn something new, is one of the greatest happiness’ to mankind.

